Once upon a time ...mmmm... no, this is not the way a user guide starts. In any case, this user guide is not going to be a standard one, because sometimes standard ways of doing things can't reflect the ideas behind new things. Deepamehta(from now on DM) is not just another application to install in your computer, is another approach to how you use your computer.

Why? maybe we think we are kind of comfortable with the way we use our computers but if we are honest with ourselves we can see that our everyday work on a computer requires a lot of effort and attention for the most simple things, a simple daily example, writing a mail , let's see what we do

1.- Open an application/program the browser or mail client
2.- Select the account that we want to check
3.- Log in
4.- Search the mail, sometimes not sure how to do it (you know who wrote it by maybe not the email, maybe the name is not associated with the mail, you know when, may 2-3 days ago, to search something requires filtering...ufff)
5.- You found it, you clic on reply...doubts appear you know this person has several account and that there is another that sees more often than the one from which you received it
6.- You go through your address book, found the correct account, now you can choose the sender
7-. Finally you begin to write
8.- Half way writing the mail you remember a text you wanted to send
9.- You have to find the text, a dialog opens you have to browse through your computer, not sure where the doc is, not way to search from here, change window and search it, you find it, you attach it
10.- You continue writing, now you want to attach a picture, yes you were sending a book but the cover was done by somebody else that send it to you in another mail.....
11.- By now you are about to procastrinate...
12.- You find the picture, you want to attach it but you realize that is too big, you need to resize it
13-. Open your favourite graphic design program and do it, you save it
14.- Finally you attach it, luckily since you just resized it you remember the path to the folder where the picture is, if not ....uffff
15.- And now you are able to continue writing the body of the message

wowww all this steps counting that you didn't make a mistake in between!!!... probably not all the mails that you send involve so many steps, but I guess you do something similar very frequently, being honest would you say that is a good approach to do a simple task like writing a mail, with just a couple of attachments? you've needed three different interfaces, the browser/mail, search the contact, the dialog/tree structure folders, the design program and to drink a tea to cope with it.
Of course, then we say, in the whole morning I've just written a couple of mails...and our brain is already stressed, it keeps running after things like the rabbit in alice in wonderland, not knowing really why.

So this is the current approach to computers, through navigation and applications but what if ...yes if things were different, if they way our brain relates things was also on the screen, what if we could see our brain connections, just imagine...





Situation

it does not show what's in the machine, but what's in your mind
"bring to me" instead a "go to" navigation/visualization approach

Not loosing the context -- hibernation, multiple tabs, sessions ...


